[master<]Gnn link prediction (#536)
memgraph/docs: mage/query-modules/python/gnn-link-prediction.md

---
id: gnn-link-prediction
title: link_prediction_with_gnn
sidebar_label: link_prediction_with_gnn
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

export const Highlight = ({children, color}) => (
<span
style={{
      backgroundColor: color,
      borderRadius: '2px',
      color: '#fff',
      padding: '0.2rem',
    }}>
{children}
</span>
);

[![docs-source](https://img.shields.io/badge/source-link_prediction_with_gnn-FB6E00?logo=github&style=for-the-badge)](https://github.com/memgraph/mage/blob/link_prediction/python/link_prediction.py)

## Abstract

> Link prediction can be defined as a problem where one wants to predict if there is a link between two nodes in the graph. It can be used for predicting missing or future links in the evolving graph. Using the notation `G = (V, E)` for a graph with nodes `V` and edges `E` and given two nodes `v1` and `v2`, the link prediction algorithm tries to predict whether those 2 nodes will be connected, based on the `node features` and `graph structure`. `Graph neural networks` have been extremely often used lately for `node-classification` and `link-prediction` problems. They are extremely useful in numerous interdisciplinary fields of work where is important to incorporate `domain-specific` knowledge to capture more `fine-grained` relationships among the data. Such fields usually involve working with `heterogeneous` and `large-scale` graphs. `GNNs` iteratively update node representations by aggregating the representations of node neighbours and their representation from the previous iteration. Such properties make `graph neural networks` a great tool for various problems we in Memgraph encounter. If your graph is evolving in time, check [TGN model](https://github.com/memgraph/mage/blob/main/python/tgn.py) that Memgraph engineers already developed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Link prediction can be defined as a problem where one wants to predict if there is a link between two nodes in the graph. It can be used for predicting missing or future links in the evolving graph. Using the notation `G = (V, E)` for a graph with nodes `V` and edges `E` and given two nodes `v1` and `v2`, the link prediction algorithm tries to predict whether those 2 nodes will be connected, based on the `node features` and `graph structure`. `Graph neural networks` have been extremely often used lately for `node-classification` and `link-prediction` problems. They are extremely useful in numerous interdisciplinary fields of work where is important to incorporate `domain-specific` knowledge to capture more `fine-grained` relationships among the data. Such fields usually involve working with `heterogeneous` and `large-scale` graphs. `GNNs` iteratively update node representations by aggregating the representations of node neighbours and their representation from the previous iteration. Such properties make `graph neural networks` a great tool for various problems we in Memgraph encounter. If your graph is evolving in time, check [TGN model](https://github.com/memgraph/mage/blob/main/python/tgn.py) that Memgraph engineers already developed.
```
```suggestion
Link prediction can be defined as a problem where one wants to predict if there is a link between two nodes in the graph. It can be used for predicting missing or future links in the evolving graph. Using the notation `G = (V, E)` for a graph with nodes `V` and edges `E` and given two nodes `v1` and `v2`, the link prediction algorithm tries to predict whether those 2 nodes will be connected, based on the `node features` and `graph structure`. Lately, `Graph neural networks` have been often used for `node-classification` and `link-prediction` problems. They are extremely useful in numerous interdisciplinary fields of work where is important to incorporate `domain-specific` knowledge to capture more `fine-grained` relationships among the data. Such fields usually involve working with `heterogeneous` and `large-scale` graphs. `GNNs` iteratively update node representations by aggregating the representations of node neighbors and their representation from the previous iteration. Such properties make `graph neural networks` a great tool for various problems we in Memgraph encounter. If your graph is evolving in time, check [TGN model](https://github.com/memgraph/mage/blob/main/python/tgn.py) that Memgraph engineers have already developed.
```

Reviewer: Why are there so many words formatted as code (` `)? They seem like regular words to me

Author: Yep, I wanted to bold them. Will correct.

### Blog Posts

> Check out these blog posts where we explain how we tried to apply link prediction:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following blog posts explain how we tried to apply link prediction:
```

- [Node2Vec](https://memgraph.com/blog/link-prediction-with-node2vec-in-physics-collaboration-network)

> - [TODO: Telecom blog](www.google.com)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<--! - [TODO: Telecom blog](www.google.com) -->
```

- **mlp** and **dot** predictors are used for combining node scores to edge scores
- **ADAM** and **SGD** optimizers are used for training neural networks
- support for **batch training**
- **parallel graph sampling**  is done using multiple threads
- **negative graph sampling** is a sampling where the final graph consists only of edges that don't exist
- evaluating the model's **training performance** using a variety of metrics like **AUC, Precision, Recall, Accuracy, Confusion matrix**
- evaluating the model's **recommendation performance** with **Precision@k, Recall@k, F1@k and Average Precision** metrics

If you want to try-out our implementation, head to **[github/memgraph/mage](https://github.com/memgraph/mage)** and find `python/link_prediction.py`. Feel free to give us some :star: if you like the code. The easiest way to test `link-prediction` is by downloading [Memgraph Platform](https://memgraph.com/download) and using some of the preloaded datasets in **Memgraph Lab**.

There are some things you should be careful about when using `link prediction`:

> - features of all nodes should be called the same(e.g saved as **'features'** property in **Memgraph**) 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- features of all nodes should be called the same (e.g saved as **'features'** property in **Memgraph**) 
```

- model's performance on the validation set is obtained using **transductive** splitting mode, while **inductive** dataset split is not yet supported. You can find more information about graph splitting on slides of [Graph Machine Learning course](http://web.stanford.edu/class/cs224w/slides/08-GNN-application.pdf) offered by **Stanford**. 
- to improve performance, `self-loop` is added to each node with the edge-type set to `self`

> - also, the user can set the flag to automatically add **reverse edges** to each existing edge and hence, convert a **directed** graph to a **bidirected** one. If the source and destination nodes of the edge are the same, **reverse edge type** will be the same as the original **edge type**. Otherwise, the prefix **rev_** will be added to the original **edge type**. See the implementation part to further see why are **self-loops** and **reverse edges** very important in ML training and how you can get into problems if your graph is already **undirected** :thinking_face: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- the user can set the flag to automatically add **reverse edges** to each existing edge and hence, convert a **directed** graph to a **bidirected** one. If the source and destination nodes of the edge are the same, **reverse edge type** will be the same as the original **edge type**. Otherwise, the prefix **rev_** will be added to the original **edge type**. See the implementation part to further see why are **self-loops** and **reverse edges** very important in ML training and how you can get into problems if your graph is already **undirected** :thinking_face: 
```

- **Currently, execution on GPU-s is not supported** so setting the parameter `device_type` doesn't change anything.  

Feel free to open a **[GitHub issue](https://github.com/memgraph/mage/issues)**
or start a discussion on **[Discord](https://discord.gg/memgraph)** if you want
to speed up development.

### Usage

The following procedure is expected when using **link prediction module**:

- set parameters by calling `set_model_parameters()` function
- train a model by calling `train()` function
- inspect training results (optional) by calling `get_training_results()` function

> - predict the relationship between two vertices by calling `predict` or

Reviewer: Does this function have ()? Recommend also?

- call the `recommend` function to find the most likely relationships

### Implementation details

> For the underlying *GNN* training we use [DGL library](https://github.com/dmlc/dgl/). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For the underlying *GNN* training we use the [DGL library](https://github.com/dmlc/dgl/). 
```

> Fast and memory-efficient message passing primitives for training Graph Neural Networks. Scale to giant graphs via multi-GPU acceleration and distributed training infrastructure.
>
> -- DGL team

#### **Splitting the dataset**

If the user specifies `split_ratio 1.0`, the model will train normally on a whole dataset without validating its performance on a validation set. However, if the user-defined split_ratio is a value between 0.0 and 1.0 but the graph is too small to have such a split, an exception will be thrown. 

#### **Self-loops**

> `Self-loop edge` is added to every node to improve link_prediction performance if specified by the user. `Self-loop edges` are added only as edge_type `self`, not in any other way, and to enable this, a custom module has been added. 

Reviewer: Why are link_prediction and edge_type written like that and not formatted or code or something?

#### **Batch training**

In heterogeneous graphs, all edges are used for creating the node’s neighbourhood but trained on only one edge type that can be set by the user. 

> For each gradient descent step, we select a mini-batch of nodes whose final representations at the L-th layer are to be computed. We then take all or some of their neighbours at the L−1 layer. This process continues until we reach the input. This iterative process builds the dependency graph starting from the output and working backwards to the input, as the figure below shows:

<img src={require('../../data/query-modules/python/gnn-link-prediction/gnn-link-prediction-neighborhood-sampling.png').default}/>

> 
> -- DGL docs

The reader is encouraged to see [DGL mini-batch explanation](https://docs.dgl.ai/guide/minibatch.html) for more details.

## Procedures

### **Set training parameters**

> The link prediction module is organized as a stateful module in which the user can run several methods one after another without losing the context. The user should start with setting the parameters that are going to be used in the training. If the graph is **heterogeneous**(more than one **edge type**), `target_relation` parameter must be set so the model could distinguish **supervision edges**(edges used in prediction) from **message passing edges**(used for message aggregation). In the case of **homogeneous graph**, `target relation` will be automatically inferred. `Node_features_property` must also be sent by the user to specify where are saved original node features. Those are needed by **Graph neural networks** to compute **node embeddings**. All other parameters are optional. Here is the description of all parameters supported by **link prediction**:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The link prediction module is organized as a stateful module in which the user can run several methods one after another without losing the context. The user should start with setting the parameters that are going to be used in the training. If the graph is **heterogeneous** (more than one **edge type**), `target_relation` parameter must be set so the model could distinguish **supervision edges** (edges used in prediction) from **message passing edges** (used for message aggregation). In the case of **homogeneous graph**, `target relation` will be automatically inferred. `Node_features_property` must also be sent by the user to specify where are saved original node features. Those are needed by **Graph neural networks** to compute **node embeddings**. All other parameters are optional. Here is the description of all parameters supported by **link prediction**:
```

#### **Input**:

| Name            | Type  | Default     | Description |
| --------------- | ----- | ----------- | ----------- |
| `hidden_features_size` | mgp.List[int] | `[16, 16]` | Defines the size of each hidden layer in the architecture. Input feature size is determined automatically while converting the original graph to the DGL-compatible one. |
| `layer_type`    | str   | `graph_attn` | Supported values are `graph_sage` and `graph_attn`. |

> | `num_epochs`    | int   | `100`  | number of epochs for model training.   |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `num_epochs`    | int   | `100`  | The number of epochs for model training.   |
```

> | `optimizer`     | str   | `ADAM` |  Supported values are `ADAM` and `SGD`. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `optimizer`     | str   | `ADAM` | Supported values are `ADAM` and `SGD`. |
```

> | `learning_rate` | float | `0.01` | optimizer's learning rate.             |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `learning_rate` | float | `0.01` | Optimizer's learning rate.             |
```

> | `split_ratio`   | float | `0.8`  | split ratio between training and validation set. There is no test dataset because it is assumed that the user first needs to create new edges in the original dataset to test a model on them. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `split_ratio`   | float | `0.8`  | The split ratio between the training and the validation set. There is no test dataset because it's assumed that the user first needs to create new edges in the original dataset to test a model on them. |
```

> | `node_features_property` | str | `features` | property name where the node features are saved. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `node_features_property` | str | `features` | Property name where the node features are saved. |
```

> | `device_type` | str | `cpu` | If the model will be trained using CPU or Cuda GPU. To be run on `cuda`, the user must set this flag to `cuda` and the system must support `cuda` execution. System’s support is checked with `torch.cuda.is_available()`. Supported values are `cpu` and `cuda`. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `device_type` | str | `cpu` | Defines if the model will be trained using the CPU or Cuda GPU. To run on Cuda GPU, check if the system supports it with `torch.cuda.is_available()`, then set this flag to `cuda`. Default value is `cpu` |
```

| `console_log_freq` | int | `5` | How often results will be printed. This also directly specifies which results will be returned as training and validation results when calling the training method. |
| `checkpoint_freq` | int | `5` | Select the number of epochs on which the model will be saved. The model is persisted on disc. |

> | `aggregator` | str | `mean` | Aggregator used in GraphSAGE model. Supported values are lstm, pool, mean and gcn. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `aggregator` | str | `mean` | Aggregator used in GraphSAGE model. Supported values are `lstm`, `pool`, `mean` and `gcn`. |
```

| `metrics` | mgp.List[str] | `[loss, accuracy, auc_score, precision, recall, f1, true_positives, true_negatives, false_positives, false_negatives]` | Metrics used to evaluate the model in training on the validation set. Additionally, epoch information will always be displayed. |
| `predictor_type` | str | `dot` | Type of the predictor. A predictor is used for combining node scores to edge scores. Supported values are `dot` and `mlp`. |
| `attn_num_heads` | List[int] | `[4, 1]` | `GAT` can support the usage of more than one head in each layer except the last one. The size of the list must be the same as the number of layers specified by the `hidden_features_size` parameter. |

> | `tr_acc_patience` | int | `8` | Training patience, specifies how many epochs will accuracy drop on the validation set be tolerated before the training will be stopped. |

Reviewer: I can't comprehend this description. Are you sure it's 100% correctly written? 
If it is, can you write it to me in croatian?

Reviewer: @as51340 - i can't figure out the subject - verb - object structure in this sentence... it's like there are too many verbs or something

> | `context_save_dir` | str | `None` | Path where the model and predictor will be saved every checkpoint_freq epochs. |

Reviewer: Should something here be in code formatting?

> | `target_relation` | str | `None` | Unique edge type that is used for training. Users can provide only `edge_type` or `tuple of the source node, edge type, dest_node` if the same `edge_type` is used with more source-destination node combinations. |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| `target_relation` | str | `None` | Unique edge type used for training. Users can provide only `edge_type` or `tuple of the source node, edge type, dest_node` if the same `edge_type` is used with more source-destination node combinations. |
```

| `num_neg_per_pos_edge` | int | `1` | Number of negative edges that will be sampled per one positive edge in the mini-batch training. |
| `batch_size` | int | `256` | Batch size used in both training and validation procedure. It specifies the number of indices in each batch. |
| `sampling_workers` | int | `5` | Number of workers that will cooperate in the sampling procedure in the training and validation. |
| `last_activation_function` | str | `sigmoid` | Activation function that is applied after the last layer in the model and before the `predictor_type`. Currently, only `sigmoid` is supported. | 

> | `add_reverse_edges` | bool | `False` | Whether the module should add reverse edges for each in the obtained graph. If the source and destination node are of the same type, edges of the same edge type will be created. If the source and destination nodes are different, then the prefix `rev_` will be added to the previous edge type. Reverse edges will be excluded as message passing edges for corresponding supervision edges. |

Reviewer: ..should add reverse edges for each WHAT in the obtained graph?

#### **Output**:

> - `status: bool` -> True if all parameters were successfully updated, False otherwise.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `status: bool` -> True if all parameters were successfully updated, false otherwise.
```

Or write it in code

> - `message: str` -> "OK" if all parameters were successfully updated, *Error message* otherwise. 

Reviewer: So many different formattings... why ", why italics?

> __You__ can send only the parameters you want to change from the default ones, so e.g the method call could look like this:

Reviewer: Only those parameters that need changing from their default values are sent when calling the procedure:

> __You__ can send only the parameters you want to change from the default ones, so e.g the method call could look like this:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Only those parameters that need changing from their default values are sent when calling the procedure:
```

```
CALL link_prediction.set_model_parameters({num_epochs: 100, node_features_property: "features", tr_acc_patience: 8, target_relation: "CITES", batch_size: 256, last_activation_function: "sigmoid", add_reverse_edges: True})
YIELD status, message
RETURN status, message;
```

### **Training**

> The training method doesn't take any parameters, so it is very simple to use. 

Reviewer: Wait, what is the training method?

Author: It's `train()` method.

> #### **Output**:

Reviewer: Documentation should be a bit more serious than the blog... so write this chapter just a bit more formal and to the point

Author: Edited.

- `training_results: List[Dict[str, float]]` -> List of training results through epochs. Model's performance is evaluated every `console_log_freq` epochs. 
- `validation results: List[Dict[str, float]]` -> List of validation results through epochs. Model's performance is evaluated every `console_log_freq` epochs. 

You can just call
```
CALL link_prediction.train() 
YIELD training_results, validation_results
RETURN training_results, validation_results;
```
and Voilà, training and validation results through epochs are summarized and returned to __you__. 

### **Get training results**

> This method is used when the user wants to get performance data obtained from the last training. It is in the same form as a result of calling the training method. If there is no loaded model, the exception will be thrown.

Reviewer: Which exactly?

```
CALL link_prediction.get_training_results()
YIELD training_results, validation_results;
RETURN training_results, validation_results;
```

#### **Output:**
- `training_results: List[Dict[str, float]]` -> List of training results through epochs. Model's performance is evaluated every `console_log_freq` epochs. 
- `validation results: List[Dict[str, float]]` -> List of validation results through epochs. Model's performance is evaluated every `console_log_freq` epochs. 

> ### **Predict**

Reviewer: You have to make it a bit more clearer what is the method without the whole query ...

SO write the method in the explanation paragraph

Author: Do you mean directly naming the method so it is more precise or?

Reviewer: I think that methods don't have names, they are always written as code and resemble a function that takes parameters - even when used as a title

predict()
recommend()
load_context()

Predict method takes two arguments, **src_vertex** and **dest_vertex**, and predicts whether there is an edge between them or not. It supports an `“actual”` prediction scenario when the edge doesn’t exist and the user wants to predict whether there is an edge or not but also a scenario in which there is an edge between two vertices and the user wants to check the model’s evaluation. 

#### Input
- `src_vertex: mgp.Vertex` -> Source vertex of the edge
- `dest_vertex: mgp.Vertex` -> Destination vertex of the edge.

#### Output
- `score: mgp.Number` -> Score between 0 and 1 that represents the probability of two nodes being connected. 

```
MATCH (v1:PAPER {id: "ID_1"})
MATCH (v2:PAPER {id: "ID_2"})
CALL link_prediction.predict(v1, v2)
YIELD score
RETURN score;
```

### **Recommend**

> Recommend method can be used to recommend the best k nodes from dest_vertices to src_vertex. It is implemented efficiently using the **max heap** data structure. The best nodes are determined based on the edge scores. Metrics specific to recommendation systems (**precision@k, recall@k, f1@k and average precision**) are logged to the **standard output**. **K** is equal to the given `min(k, length(dest_vertices), length(results))` where results are a list of all recommendations given by the model(classified as a positive example.)

Reviewer: Code formatting for dest_vertices and src_vertex?

#### Input
- `src_vertex: mgp.Vertex` → Source node.
- `dest_vertices: List[mgp.Vertex]` → destination nodes. If they are not of the same type, an exception is thrown.
- `k: int` → Number of edges to recommend. 

#### Output
- `score: mgp.Number` → Score between 0 and 1 that represents the probability of two nodes being connected.
- `recommendation: mgp.Vertex` → A reference to the target node.

```
MATCH (v1:Customer {id: "8779-QRDMV"})
MATCH (p:Plan) 
WITH collect(p) AS all_plans, v1 
CALL link_prediction.recommend(v1, all_plans, 5)
YIELD score, recommendation
RETURN v1, score, recommendation;
```

### **Load context**

> Loading the context means loading the model and the predictor. If the user specifies the path, the method will try to load it from there. Otherwise, context will be loaded from the default parameter specified in the link_prediction_parameters module.

Reviewer: code format on the link_prediction_parameters?

#### Input
- `path: str` → Path to the folder where the model and the predictor are saved.

#### Output
- `status: mgp.Any` → True to indicate that execution went well.

```
CALL link_prediction.load_context() YIELD * RETURN *;
```

### **Reset parameters**

> User can explicitly reset parameters whenever he/she wants. Note, however, that parameters will be reset before the training even if not specified by the user because of implementation reasons.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can explicitly reset parameters whenever you want. Note, however, that parameters will be reset before the training even if not specified because of implementation reasons.
```

Or decide whether you want to use USER through the whole docs and write general rules or YOU and give instructions

#### Output
- `status: mgp.Any` → True to indicate that method is successfully finished.

```
CALL link_prediction.reset_parameters() YIELD * RETURN *;
```

## Results

We extensively tested our model on [**CORA**](https://paperswithcode.com/dataset/cora) dataset and the Telecom recommendation dataset. Here are the results of one of our basic models on the Cora dataset after training for 10 epochs:

| epoch_num | AUC   | accuracy | precision | recall | f1    |
| --------- | ----- | -------- | --------- | ------ | ----- |
| 1         | 0.64  | 0.594    | 0.613     | 0.494  | 0.547 |
| 2         | 0.781 | 0.696    | 0.711     | 0.663  | 0.686 |
| 3         | 0.798 | 0.729    | 0.752     | 0.682  | 0.715 | 
| 4         | 0.754 | 0.686    | 0.716     | 0.617  | 0.663 |
| 5         | 0.789 | 0.711    | 0.715     | 0.7    | 0.707 |
| 6         | 0.813 | 0.756    | 0.742     | 0.784  | 0.763 |
| 7         | 0.884 | 0.772    | 0.764     | 0.791  | 0.775 |
| 8         | 0.859 | 0.775    | 0.781     | 0.766  | 0.773 |
| 9         | 0.871 | 0.805    | 0.822     | 0.777  | 0.798 |
| 10        | 0.832 | 0.759    | 0.776     | 0.729  | 0.752

> ## Example

Reviewer: SOme intro for this example... what is it an example of and what does it do and why :D

| 19                 | 0.833              | 0.938              | 0.365              | 0.75               |
| 20                 | 0.917              | 0.938              | 0.341              | 1.0                |
| 21                 | 0.917              | 0.938              | 0.315              | 1.0                |
| 22                 | 0.833              | 0.969              | 0.296              | 0.75               |
| 23                 | 0.917              | 1.0                | 0.277              | 1.0                |
| 24                 | 0.917              | 1.0                | 0.246              | 0.8                |
| 25                 | 0.917              | 1.0                | 0.233              | 0.8                |
| 26                 | 1.0                | 1.0                | 0.202              | 1.0                |
```

  </TabItem>

  <TabItem value="predict"> 

```cypher
MATCH (v1:PAPER {id: 10})
MATCH (v2:PAPER {id: 12})
CALL link_prediction.predict(v1, v2)
YIELD score
RETURN score;
```

  </TabItem>

  <TabItem value="predict-results">

```plaintext
+-------+
| score |
| 0.104 |
```

  </TabItem>

</Tabs>

## FAQ

> ### **Why you can get into problems with reverse edges?**

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### **Why can I get  into problems with reverse edges?**
```

> As specified in one of the chapters above, **reverse edges** deserve a little bit more attention. Having a `reverse_edge` in your dataset can be a problem if they are not excluded from `message passing edges` in the prediction of its `opposite edge`(`supervision edge`). The best thing you can do is have a `directed` graph and we will automatically add reverse edges, if you specify `add_reverse_edges` in the `set_model_parameters` method, in a way that doesn't cause information flow. 

Reviewer: Which chapter? Link with anchor

Actually, i would just lose the first sentence

Who is we? We will automatically add reverse edges?

Author: The module, not we.
